.TH GENJ 1 "December 2025" "genj 1.3.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
genj \- Generate a Java project from a template
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B genj
[\fB\-\-list\fR | \fB\-\-search\fR \fITERM\fR | [\fB\-t\fR \fITEMPLATE\fR] \fB\-d\fR \fIDESTINATION\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B genj
is a command-line tool written in Rust that generates a Java project from a template (ZIP file or folder).
The binary reads a template, copies files to the destination directory while applying variable replacements
in file paths and content. It also handles the transformation of the \fB${PACKAGE}\fR variable into a Java folder hierarchy.

Templates can be discovered using the \fB\-\-list\fR and \fB\-\-search\fR options, or provided directly via \fB\-\-template\fR.
.SH DISCOVERY OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-list
List all available templates from system and user template directories:
.TP
.IP ""
.BR /usr/share/genj/templates
- System-wide templates
.TP
.IP ""
.BR ~/.genj/
- User-specific templates

Displays template metadata including description, language, version, author, license, and tags.
.TP
.BI \-\-search " TERM"
Search for templates matching a search term (case-insensitive).
Searches across template name, description, language, author, version, contact, license, and tags.
Displays matching templates with full metadata.
.TP
.BI \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output: print detailed processing information (file and directory operations, replacements, zip extraction details, git/vscode setup) to the terminal for debugging and tracing the generation workflow.
.SH GENERATION OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-t,\ \-\-template " TEMPLATE"
Path to the template (ZIP file or folder).
.IP ""
Default search paths (if template name without path is provided):
.IP ""
1. \fB/usr/share/genj/templates/\fR
.TP
.IP ""
2. \fB~/.genj/\fR
.TP
.BI \-d,\ \-\-destination " DESTINATION"
Destination directory where the project will be created.
If not specified, the current directory is used.
.SH OPTIONAL PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI \-n,\ \-\-project_name " NAME"
Project name (default: \fBDemo\fR).
.TP
.BI \-a,\ \-\-author " NAME"
Author name (default: \fBUnknown Author\fR).
.TP
.BI \-e,\ \-\-email " EMAIL"
Author email (default: \fBemail@unknown.local\fR).
.TP
.BI \-v,\ \-\-project_version " VERSION"
Project version (default: \fB0.0.1\fR).
.TP
.BI \-j,\ \-\-java_version " VERSION"
JDK version to target (e.g., \fB25\fR). Also used in \fBpom.xml\fR and \fBbuild.gradle\fR (default: \fB25\fR).
.TP
.BI \-f,\ \-\-java_flavor " FLAVOR"
JDK flavor for sdkman (e.g., \fB25-zulu\fR) (default: \fB25-zulu\fR).
.TP
.BI \-k,\ \-\-package " PACKAGE"
Java package name (default: \fBcom.demo\fR).
.TP
.BI \-m,\ \-\-mainclass " CLASS"
Main class name (default: \fBApp\fR).
.TP
.BI \-b,\ \-\-build " TOOL"
Build tool to use: \fBmaven\fR or \fBgradle\fR (default: \fBmaven\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-maven_version " VERSION"
Maven version for \fB.sdkmanrc\fR (default: \fB3.9.5\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-gradle_version " VERSION"
Gradle version for \fB.sdkmanrc\fR (default: \fB8.5\fR).
.TP
.BI \-l,\ \-\-vendor_name " NAME"
Vendor name (usable in templates) (default: \fBVendor\fR).
.TP
.BI \-r,\ \-\-remote_git_repository " URL"
Define the remote git repository for this project.
.SH REPLACEMENT VARIABLES
The following patterns are replaced in files and file names:
.TP
\fB${PROJECT_NAME}\fR
Project name.
.TP
\fB${AUTHOR_NAME}\fR
Author name.
.TP
\fB${AUTHOR_EMAIL}\fR
Author email.
.TP
\fB${PROJECT_VERSION}\fR
Project version.
.TP
\fB${PACKAGE}\fR
Java package (transformed into folder hierarchy, e.g., \fBcom.example\fR becomes \fBcom/example\fR).
.TP
\fB${MAINCLASS}\fR
Main class name.
.TP
\fB${PROJECT_YEAR}\fR
Current year.
.TP
\fB${JAVA}\fR
JDK version.
.TP
\fB${VENDOR_NAME}\fR
Vendor name.
.SH GENERATED FILES
.B genj
automatically generates the following files:
.TP
\fBpom.xml\fR
Maven build configuration (if \fB--build maven\fR).
.TP
\fBbuild.gradle\fR
Gradle build configuration (if \fB--build gradle\fR).
.TP
\fB.sdkmanrc\fR
SDKMan configuration file with Java and build tool versions.
.TP
\fB.genrc\fR
JSON configuration file documenting the generation parameters and metadata.
.TP
\fB.vscode/settings.json\fR
VSCode Java project settings.
.TP
\fB.vscode/launch.json\fR
VSCode launch configuration for debugging.
.TP
\fB.git/\fR
Git repository initialized with initial commit.
.SH TEMPLATE METADATA
Templates can include a \fB.template\fR metadata file (JSON format) at the root to provide information about the template:
.TP
.B Example .template metadata:
.IP ""
.nf
{
  "name": "Basic Java",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "language": "Java",
  "description": "Basic Java project template with Maven support",
  "author": "Template Author",
  "contact": "author@example.com",
  "license": "MIT",
  "tags": ["java", "maven", "basic"],
  "created_at": "2025-12-02T10:00:00Z"
}
.fi
.TP
Metadata is displayed when using \fB\-\-list\fR and \fB\-\-search\fR options.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
List all available templates:
.B genj --list
.TP
Search for templates containing "spring":
.B genj --search spring
.TP
Generate a Maven project from a template folder:
.B genj -t templates/basic-java -d ./out -n Demo -a "Frédéric Delorme" -e fred@example.com -v 0.1.0 -k com.demo -m App
.TP
Generate a Gradle project from a ZIP template:
.B genj -t template.zip -d ./out -n MyProject -b gradle --gradle_version 8.5
.TP
Generate with specific JDK version:
.B genj -t templates/basic-java -d ./out -n Demo -j 25 -f 25-zulu
.TP
Generate with verbose output for debugging:
.B genj -t basic-java -d ./out -n Demo --verbose
.SH TEMPLATE SEARCH PATHS
When a template name (without path separators) is provided with \fB\-\-template\fR, genj searches in the following order:
.TP
1. \fB/usr/share/genj/templates/\fR
.TP
2. \fB~/.genj/\fR
.TP
If the template is not found in these directories, it is treated as a file path.
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 2
The program creates the destination directory as \fB<destination>/<project_name>\fR.
.IP \(bu 2
If the template is a ZIP file, the script attempts to remove a common root prefix present in the archive.
.IP \(bu 2
Binary files detected (non-text) are copied as is; only text files undergo variable replacements.
.IP \(bu 2
The Git repository is automatically initialized with an initial commit.
.IP \(bu 2
For information on how to create custom templates, see
.BR genj-template (5).
.SH AUTHOR
Frédéric Delorme
.SH VERSION
1.3.1
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
.BR genj-template (5)
Template format and creation guide for genj projects.
.TP
For more information, visit the project repository or consult the README.md file.